[Music]
are there troops out there that will
forever remain unknowable can
mathematics have any input into this
question one way or the other in this
top cast we're going to look at the
limitations of mathematics and some more
of the curious and surprising
consequences of deductive systems
[Music]
perhaps you're having a drink while
listening to this I've got a cup of tea
here with me at the moment it's about a
meter away from my hand in order to pick
up my tea for the next sip I can think
of my hand moving in steps like this
first it moves half a meter towards the
cup once that's done I move my hand a
quarter of a meter towards the cup after
that an eighth then a sixteenth and so
on in other words I can divide up the
meter between my hand and the cup into
an infinite number of ever smaller
increments half of the distance then
half of what's left and half of what's
left or that and so on I would have an
infinite series 1/2 1/4 1/8 1/16 1/32
and so on this could go on forever but
if this sequence is infinite even if the
increments get ever smaller it will take
me an infinite amount of time to reach
the cup because each step howsoever
small will take some short amount of
time to complete and I don't have an
infinite amount of time yet I can pick
up the cup how is this possible now this
supposed problem is called a paradox
it's obvious I can pick up the cup and
yet I've produced an argument that seems
to be watertight it must contain an
error however it turns out there are two
solutions one is mathematical the other
its physical as we live in a physical
world
physical argument is the true solution
in the actual world and that solution is
just this according to quantum physics
you simply cannot divide up either space
or time into infinitely small increments
there is actually a limit on how small
space can be and how short time can be
the division of time will go on for a
while
but eventually it will terminate at a
shortest possible time
in fact it stops at around 10 to the
power of minus 34 seconds this is known
as the Planck time so that's one
solution there is however also a purely
mathematical solution as well it says it
doesn't matter if you have a series made
up of an infinite number of terms you
can add up all those terms and yet still
get something less than infinity if you
do a higher level of mathematics you
might like to prove what the series 1/2
plus 1/4 plus 1/8 plus 1/16 onto
infinity
adds up to or more rigorously what the
limiting some of that series is the
answer
happens to be 1 in other words I can add
up all those little fractions and still
get a finite number remember I started
with something finite a meter and then
basically argued for cutting my meter up
into an infinite number of slices I then
tried to say that you couldn't take all
of those slices and add them together
again
to get 1 meter it's a bit slippery this
is essentially one of the paradoxes of
Zeno Zeno of Elea came up with these in
ancient Greece and around 450 BC another
of these arguments was about The
Tortoise and Achilles and that's worth
looking up so what does this suggest it
suggests that deductive systems can
sometimes turn up some really surprising
results in the case of the paradox just
discussed it seems like I had a
watertight argument which deduced I
could never pick up my cup of course it
turns out my argument was not a real
paradox but can you have real paradoxes
in mathematics most definitely we
we'll see that paradoxical statements
actually have consequences for the
entirety of mathematics first a
diversion into set theory however my
students of mathematics at some point
encounter setter theory in their senior
years of high school the idea of a set
is simple a set can be empty or it can
contain members in fact even primary
school students can be taught the basics
of set theory using Venn diagrams this
sort of set theory allows for everything
in the universe to be considered part of
a big universal set we can talk about
infinite sets or finite sets the set of
all positive integers is an infinite set
the set of all prime ministers of
Australia is a finite set which has 26
members as of 2009 perhaps you know some
of the members of fair shake of the
source pollinator now does this idea of
sets lead to any problems well it turns
out it does Bertrand Russell a British
mathematician who was alive in the early
to mid 20th century and who will hear
about more later on raised a version of
the following paradox it is named for
him and so it's called Russell's paradox
the version I will give you is not
exactly like Russell's own but is the
one which appears in most texts and
resources on the Internet let's begin
[Music]
all libraries have catalogs a catalog is
a list of all books in the library
now imagine that the catalog is a
physical book listing all the books in a
particular library now most libraries
have the practice of including a
reference to the catalog in the catalog
itself after all the catalog itself is a
book in the library so it's written down
in the catalog but I happen to know that
my local library does not list the
catalog itself as an entry in the
catalog the librarian thinks it would be
silly to do so after all if you've got
the catalog in your hands you don't need
to look it up to find out if it's in the
library or not okay now stay with me on
this the most important library in
Australia is called the National Library
in it's in Canberra now the National
Library keeps a record of all the
library catalogs in the country it
actually has two catalogues of catalogs
the first contains all the catalogs
which lists themselves as members the
second contains all the catalogs which
do not list themselves as members the
problem for the National Library is
where does the entry for the second
catalog go should we write its entry
into the first catalog if we do this
then we are saying that it lists itself
as a member but that means we need to
actually write down an entry for the
second catalog into the second catalog
but once we do this then we have an
entry in the second catalog that breaks
the rules for the second catalog namely
that it should list only those catalogs
that do not list themselves as members
now this is a genuine paradox it's hard
work and you may need to listen back
over the last couple of minutes to
appreciate it there are notes to
accompany this podcast and they might
help also I see this particular paradox
as a more intricate version of the liar
paradox the most trivial liar paradox is
this statement is a lie or this
statement is false now consider that
statement is it true or false if it's
asserting something true then it's a lie
but if it's a lie then it cannot be true
there are many versions of this paradox
and Russell's paradox also the first
such paradox that appears in Western
philosophical writings is Eppie Melody's
paradox app humanity's who's from Crete
and he wrote that all czar liars
it's not clear if he intended this
statement to be paradoxical or not
Russell's paradox about sets is more
succinctly expressed as if s is the set
of all sets that are not members of
themselves is s a member of s again this
is very tricky to get the first time you
hear it and for that reason we went in
on the National Library in Canberra I
hope that helped to overcome these
problems with set theory mathematicians
choose a set of rules to govern it these
rules are the foundation upon which set
theory is built and explain what can and
what cannot be regarded as a set and how
it is possible to for example add two
sets together or multiply one set by
another these rules in mathematics are
called axioms axioms ideally should be
consistent they certainly shouldn't emit
falsehoods or absurdity to be proved it
turns out you can define set theory in
such a way as to avoid Russell's paradox
and similar problems set theory that
permits paradoxes is called naive set
theory for this reason so is that the
end of the matter then just pick a set
of rules which make paradoxes impossible
then can we say mathematics will let us
prove things as true the problem after
all is that a paradox shows that there
is something lacking in your system of
proof if it permits paradoxes then it
seems like your foundations lead to
nonsense and this might mean your
foundations are therefore nonsense
themselves and so the rest of what you
end up proving might not be as certain
as you hoped so a proper choice of
axioms can eliminate Russell's paradox
well yes but it turns out there are
bigger problems than this
[Music]
at the turn of the century
Bertrand Russell whom I mentioned
earlier along with Alfred Whitehead
wrote a huge book called principia
mathematica
in it they set out to put all of
mathematics on a firm logical footing it
was published in 1913 and it was all
about the foundations of mathematics it
included the axioms of arithmetic for
example
it included axioms for other types of
mathematics also such as set theory the
question was could you ever find a
statement written down using the rules
of mathematics that could never be
proven or disproven well in 1931 the
answer was found and it was found by one
of the most brilliant mathematicians who
ever lived
Kirk girdled was a German mathematician
who was born in 1906 in what is now the
Czech Republic by age 18 he had mastered
university level mathematics in 1931 he
published a paper which contained but
are now known as hurdles incompleteness
theorems they are possibly the most
important theorems of mathematics
discovered in the last 200 years girdle
had to actually invent a new form of
mathematical proof involving what is now
known as gdel numbering in order to
establish his theorems the proofs
themselves are very deep and very
complex and run to around 20 pages you
can actually buy them through amazon.com
in a little book it seems like every
second popular book on science and every
popular book on mathematics mentions
girdle's incompleteness theorems so
what's the big deal about them firstly
the concepts of soundness and
completeness soundness is the concept
that a set of rules logical or
mathematical permit only true statements
to be proved in other words starting
from the axioms you cannot prove a
falsehood completeness is effectively
the mirror image of soundness
completeness is about whether or not
everything that is true within the
system has a proof or equivalently
whether for any given expression you can
write down using the symbols of that
system whether that statement can be
shown to be either true or false
there are lots of axiomatic systems the
basic useful one is probably sentential
calculus or sentential logic it's the
most basic type of logic at school if
you're lucky you might encounter a
rarefied version of it at university if
you take on a science or engineering
course it's hard to miss it if you study
philosophy or mathematics and in depth
you will likely take on one or more
courses in logic as for sentential logic
it can pretty easily be shown to be
sound and complete but for systems more
complex than baby logic like this it
gets more interesting until girdle no
one was really sure about normal
run-of-the-mill
primary school counting style arithmetic
now the rules or axioms of arithmetic
are quite complex the ones that are
generally used and which girdle used are
called peano's axioms after the
mathematician who first wrote them down
I mentioned them in the last top caste
girdle showed that arithmetic is sound
everything that you can prove using the
axioms is true and you can't prove
anything that's not ok done but what
about completeness girdle showed that he
could write down a statement that
asserted its own impossibility of
deciding as true or false again to
explain this fully takes the full
arsenal of girdle's proof and is well
beyond most except perhaps those who
have passed through a third-year
university course on the topic but to
appreciate the idea is simple girdle
essentially wrote down the mathematical
equivalent of this statement is false
using the symbols of arithmetic this
statement is what is called undecidable
it suffers from all the paradoxical
issues that we discussed earlier with
sets that are not members of themselves
and the liar paradox so what's the big
deal well that means that mathematics
even simple arithmetic is not complete
there are statements in mathematics that
are true but which we can never prove as
such and there are statements which we
can never decide as being either true or
false this is very significant it has
consequences for computer science for
example no computer can be programmed
which is able to once and for all solve
all the problems of mathematics there is
thus no perfect calculus
this is probably a very good thing it
means mathematics will forever remain a
creative exercise girdle himself was a
troubled man but he became friends with
Einstein when he moved to Princeton
University in the United States prior to
the Second World War
apparently girdle and Einstein would
take long walks together at the
Institute for Advanced Study where they
both worked with Einstein actually
remark about towards the end of his life
his own work there ceased to interest
him very much and instead he only went
in order to have the privilege of
walking home with girdle for Einstein's
70th birthday girdles present to him was
a set of paradoxical solutions to
general relativity which suggested the
possibility of time travel to the Past
towards the end of his own life girdle
was plagued with mental illness and
became convinced that people were trying
to poison him he eventually starved
himself to death and died in 1978 I did
hear a story years ago that during their
walks Einstein would force girdle to eat
morning tea with him when he noticed how
thin girdle was but I can't find any
references now to this particular story
and would appreciate it if someone could
corroborate it for me the significance
of girdles incompleteness theorems are
far-reaching but like quantum theory and
cosmology and any sufficiently complex
human intellectual endeavor it has been
commandeered by some to push fringe or
even pseudo-scientific claims often
girdles proof is cited by relativists
philosophers to bolster their claim that
mathematics is unreliable without fully
appreciating the significance of the
theorem or understanding entirely the
concept of completeness you will
nonetheless encounter pronouncements
that girls proof shows that mathematics
is inconsistent this is certainly not
the case it is also sometimes asserted
that the incompleteness theorems have
far-ranging consequences for the nature
of the human mind so the argument
generally goes like this
girdle's incompleteness theorem leads to
the idea that if you have a system like
a computer for proving theorems let's
say of arithmetic then there will be
statements that can be produced using
the rules of that system which are true
but which nonetheless cannot be
recognized as true by that system this
leads to the idea
that the human mind cannot therefore be
a mere machine or a computer because as
a human it seems to be inconceivable
that one could be unable to judge us
true
a given theorem if it were actually true
this is an often repeated mantra of some
who write popular science at best it is
overreaching while at worst it's
disingenuous the fact is we can produce
any number of statements that are true
and cannot be judged as such
consider the following pronouncement
Barack Obama cannot consistently judge
this statement to be true now I can see
the statement is true you can see the
statement is true but despite its truth
Barack Obama cannot however hard he
tries consistently judge it as true
girdle's incompleteness theorems do not
have any supernatural consequences they
say something quite strange and
surprising about mathematics but this
does not mean that it then justifies
everything strange and surprising about
mathematics it is strange and surprising
that sometimes very smart people draw
conclusions from science that really
they aren't entitled to Science and
Mathematics are fascinating and we need
not draw any conclusions about some of
the amazing results we encounter in
those fields unless we are compelled to
by the evidence be that scientific or in
this case mathematical so there we have
it a top cast about the limitations of
mathematics there will always be
mathematical statements than even the
techniques of mathematics won't be able
to prove as true or false it's not all
mechanistic and impersonal it's
fascinating it requires a higher level
of creativity and the only thing you
should expect is to be continually
surprised
the deeper you look into mathematics
[Music]
for resources and links associated with
Tokyo's visit the da cast website at
www.nimbios.org
you